## Basic Variables
>[!example] Definition: The Hamiltonian
>For generalized coordinates $q_i$, the **Hamiltonian Function** or **Hamiltonian** $\mathcal{H}$ is defined as
>$$\mathcal{H}=\sum\limits_{i=1}^{n}p_{i}\dot{q}_{i}-\mathcal{L}$$
>Where $\mathcal{L}$ is the [[Lagrangian Mechanics#^9ad443|lagrangian]]

The important distinction here is the use of coordinates. Both the systems use $2n$ coordinates, but where the lagrangian coordinates are $(q_{1},\dots,q_{n},\dot{q}_{1},\dots,\dot{q}_n)$, the hamiltonian coordinates are $(q_{1},\dots,q_{n},p_{1},\dots,p_{n})$

Moreover, the lagrange approach defines a point in **state space**, where the hamiltonian defines a point in what is usualy called **phase space**.

## One Dimensional Systems
For these systems, there is one generalized coordinate, so the lagrangian is a function of $q$ and $\dot{q}$.
$$\mathcal{L}=\mathcal{L}(q,\dot{q})=T(q,\dot{q})-U(q)$$
This has the more general form:
$$\mathcal{L}=T-U=\frac{1}{2}A(q)\dot{q}^{2}-U(q)$$
The hamilton, reduced to one dimension, is given by
$$\mathcal{H}=p\dot{q}-\mathcal{L}$$
The generalized momentum can be calculated from the lagrangian to be
$$p=\frac{\partial\mathcal{L}}{\partial\dot{q}}=A(q)\dot{q}$$
this means $p\dot{q}=2T$, which we can substitute into the hamiltonian form, giving us
$$\mathcal{H}=2T-(T-U)=T+U$$
Thus the hamiltonian for a natural system is the total energy.
We can additionally solve for $\dot{q}$ in terms of $p$ and $q$, so
$$\dot{q}(p,q)=p/A(q)$$
Thus the hamiltonian as a function of $p,q$ can be expressed:
$$\mathcal{H}(q,p)=p\dot{q}(q,p)-\mathcal{L}(q,\dot{q}(q,p))$$
We now want to get equations of motion, which is the ultimate goal of any physics process. We begin by differentiating $\mathcal{H}$ with respect to $q$, using the chain rule.
$$\frac{\partial\mathcal{H}}{\partial q}=p\frac{\partial\dot{q}}{\partial q}-\bigg[\frac{\partial\mathcal{L}}{\partial q}+\frac{\partial\mathcal{L}}{\partial\dot{q}}\frac{\partial\dot{q}}{\partial q}\bigg]$$
The first and third terms cancel each other out, leaving us with the equation.
$$\frac{\partial\mathcal{H}}{\partial q}=-\dot{p}$$
Repeating the same process for the generalized momentum yields a similar equation:
$$\frac{\partial\mathcal{H}}{\partial p}=\dot{q}$$
These are the hamilton equations for a one-dimensional system.
## Hamilton's Equations in Several Dimensions
The one-dimensional derivation is easily extended to multiple dimensions. Let's define some variables for an $n$ body system.
The generalized coordinates are $\textbf{q}=(q_1,\dots,q_n)$
The generalized velocities are then $\dot{\textbf{q}}=(\dot{q}_1,\dots,\dot{q}_n)$
The generalized momenta are $\textbf{p}=(p_1,\dots,p_n)$
We start with the lagrangian:
$$\mathcal{L}=\mathcal{L}(\textbf{q},\dot{\textbf{q}},t)=T-U$$
We define the hamiltonian as above, and specifically define the generalized velocity in terms of the others:
$$\dot{\textbf{q}}=\dot{\textbf{q}}(\textbf{q},\textbf{p},t)$$
The derivation proceeds exactly the same as in one-dimension.
>[!example] Definition: Hamilton's Equation
>Hamilton's Equations of motion are as follows:
>$$\dot{q}_{i}=\frac{\partial\mathcal{H}}{\partial p_{i}}\quad\text{ and }\quad\dot{p}_{i}=-\frac{\partial\mathcal{H}}{\partial q_{i}}\quad\quad[i=1,\dots,n]$$
>These equations are invariant under canonical transformations.

## Phase Space and Orbits
Let's define an $n$-body system with the variables $q_1,\dots,q_n$, with conjugate momenta $p_1,\dots,p_n$.

Taking a look at the first $n$ equations generated by the Hamiltonian, we get
$$\dot{q}_i=\frac{\partial\mathcal{H}}{\partial p_i}=f_{i}(\textbf{q},\textbf{p})$$
A function of the vectors containing the positions and momenta.
We then get a single equation:
$$\dot{\textbf{q}}=\textbf{f}(\textbf{q},\textbf{p})$$
In the same way, the equations for the momenta can be written in the same way,
$$\dot{\textbf{p}}=\textbf{g}(\textbf{q},\textbf{p})$$
This allows us to introduce the **phase-space vector**, which is a two dimensional vector,
$$\textbf{z}=(\textbf{q},\textbf{p})$$
We can then combine the hamilton equations into one equation, giving
$$\dot{\textbf{z}}=\textbf{h}(\textbf{z})$$
This is a first order differential equation, which are usually very simple to solve. Another special property is that if we introduce a transformation that transforms the generalized coordinates to $\textbf{q}$ to a new set of coordinates $\textbf{Q}$ by a function $\textbf{Q}=\textbf{Q}(\textbf{q})$, the hamiltonian is invariant. This also changes the momenta, by $\textbf{P}=\textbf{P}(\textbf{p})$.
Another transformation can be given by
$$\textbf{Q}=\textbf{Q}(\textbf{q},\textbf{p})\quad\text{and}\quad\textbf{P}=\textbf{P}(\textbf{q},\textbf{p})$$
This is called a canonical transformation, and hamilton's equations are invariant under these types as well.

The vector $\textbf{z}$ defines a unique point in $2n$-dimensional phase space for the system. Hamilton's equations define a unique trajectory. For any point $z_0$ in phase space, there can only be one distinct orbit passing through the point. 
